---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Critical thinking: A Glimpse Introduction

according to [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_thinking) critical thinking is a "mental process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing, applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating information gathered from, or generated by, observation, experience, reflection, reasoning, or communication, as a guide to belief and action."

here another definition of critial thinking: 

- "Active, persistent, and careful consideration of a belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds which support it and the further conclusions to which it tends." (Dewey, 1909, p. 9)
- "(1) an attitude of being disposed to consider in a thoughtful way the problems and subjects that come within the range of one’s experience; (2) knowledge of the methods of logical enquiry and reasoning; and (3) some skill in applying those methods. Critical thinking calls for a persistent effort to examine any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the evidence that supports it and the further conclusions to which it tends." (Glaser, 1941, p. 5)
- "Critical thinking is that mode of thinking – about any subject, content or problem – in which the thinker improves the quality of his or her thinking by skilfully taking charge of the structures inherent in thinking and imposing intellectual standards upon them." (Paul, Fisher and Nosich, 1993, p. 4)
- Critical thinking is skilled and active interpretation and evaluation of observations and communications, information and argumentation. (Fisher and Scriven, 1997, p. 21)

## creativity and critical thinking

The two is not mutually exclusive. Creativity is a process of generating new ideas, while critical thinking is a process of evaluating ideas. Creativity is a process of generating new ideas, while critical thinking is a process of evaluating ideas. while it seems the two is not mutually exclusive, but it is. we need to think creatively in order to think critically. also when you engange in crital thinking you will be more creative.

the phrase is "it doesn't have to be this way" is a good example of critical thinking. it is a phrase that can be used to evaluate the current situation and find a better way to do it. what is possible and what is currently happening. the phrase is require creativity and result in better think critically. 

## think to think critically
not all things 